src/content/blog/post-4.mdx, before:

---
title: "Custom cursor interactions with :has"
slug: custom-cursor-hover-effects-with-has
description: "This post will show up on its own!"
pubDate: 2025-12-09
draft: false
---

{/* There’s something oddly satisfying about a cursor that does more than just point and click. A subtle dot that follows your movement, changes color, or grows when you hover over elements can add a playful, tactile feel to a website. There's plenty of creative versions of this effect on sites like Awwwards. When inspecting these websites I always found there's a lot of javaScript that is used to create the effect. */}
Custom cursors are everywhere on inspirational sites like Awwwards. Dots that trail your movement, change color, or scale when you hover over elements. When inspecting these implementations, I often notice how much JavaScript is involved.
Like always I was curious if it was possible to create this effect with as little javaScript as possible. Of course there's some javaScript needed to get the mouse position and apply it to the custom cursor. But with CSS custom properties it's possible to pass the mouse coordinates as variables and let CSS do the rest. So what about mouse interactions such as hover or active? Well, with the `:has` pseudo-class it's possible to check if the cursor is hovering over any element in the document and apply different styles to the custom cursor.

The `:has` pseudo-class is mostly referred to as the "parent selector" because it allows you to select a parent element based on its children. In most cases it's used to select a parent based on its direct children or descendants. But the implications of this selector are much greater. By chaining selectors together it's possible to select elements based on other elements that are nowhere near each other. The trick is to go completely up the document tree and down again. That's why it is sometimes referred to as the "god selector".

The basic setup is to add an empty `<div class="cursor"></div>` element at the end of the body. This makes sure the cursor is always on top of other elements by default. You could do this step with javascript but why not just add it to the HTML directly?

The javascript is pretty simple. All that's needed is the mouse position while moving and pass the coordinates as CSS custom properties. If you want a smoother effect you need to add a delay and use `requestAnimationFrame`. I'm adding px to the end of the values to make sure they can be used as CSS values. But you could even do that in CSS. This is the basic version:

```javascript
document.addEventListener("mousemove", (e) => {
  document.documentElement.style.setProperty("--mx", e.clientX + "px");
  document.documentElement.style.setProperty("--my", e.clientY + "px");
});
```

So now the 2 custom properties `--mx` and `--my` are added to the document root. Since the custom properties update when the mouse moves, the cursor will follow the mouse when we apply them as variables for the value of the `translate` property of the cursor.

```css
.cursor {
  --cursor-size: 20px;
  width: var(--cursor-size);
  aspect-ratio: 1;
  border-radius: 50%;
  background-color: indigo;
  position: fixed;
  top: 0;
  left: 0;
  /* use translate to substract the size directly */
  translate: calc(var(--mx) - var(--cursor-size) / 2) calc(
      var(--my) - var(--cursor-size) / 2
    );
  transition: 0.25s ease;
  transition-property: scale, opacity;
  pointer-events: none;
}
```

I'm also using custom properties to set the width and height of the cursor. This makes it easy to change the size of the cursor in one place. And I can use the same property to position the cursor in the middle of the cursor by using `calc` to subtract half the width and height from the mouse position.

And now it's time to use the `:has` pseudo-class to check if the document has any hovered or active links or buttons. If it does, we can change the size and opacity of the cursor to create a hover effect.

```css
body:has(:is(a:hover, button:hover)) .cursor {
  scale: 2;
  opacity: 0.75;
}

body:has(:is(a:active, button:active)) .cursor {
  scale: 1.5;
  opacity: 0.75;
}
```

import CursorBasic from "../../components/Demos/Cursor/CursorBasic.astro";

<CursorBasic />

That's all there is to it. You can of course add more interactions and styles to the cursor. For example changing the color based on the hovered element or adding different effects for different types of elements. The possibilities are endless.

import CursorAdvanced from "../../components/Demos/Cursor/CursorAdvanced.astro";

<CursorAdvanced />

In this case I updated the cursor's internal HTML with multiple possible states. Based on the hovered element different parts of the cursor are shown or hidden. This way I can show text inside the cursor or show an icon based on the hovered element.

```css
body:has(.cursor-read:hover) .cursor__pointer--read {
  opacity: 1;
}
```

Have a look at [this codepen](https://codepen.io/simoncoudeville/pen/yyeMwbb) to see the full code and play around with it.

import Cursor from "../../components/Demos/Cursor/cursor.astro";

<Cursor />

Commit message:

Update description for post on custom cursor interactions using :has pseudo-class

src/content/blog/post-4.mdx, after:

---
title: "Custom cursor interactions with :has"
slug: custom-cursor-hover-effects-with-has
description: "How to create a custom cursor that reacts to hover and active states using the :has pseudo-class and CSS custom properties."
pubDate: 2025-12-09
draft: false
---

{/* There’s something oddly satisfying about a cursor that does more than just point and click. A subtle dot that follows your movement, changes color, or grows when you hover over elements can add a playful, tactile feel to a website. There's plenty of creative versions of this effect on sites like Awwwards. When inspecting these websites I always found there's a lot of javaScript that is used to create the effect. */}
Custom cursors are everywhere on inspirational sites like Awwwards. Dots that trail your movement, change color, or scale when you hover over elements. When inspecting these implementations, I often notice how much JavaScript is involved.
Like always I was curious if it was possible to create this effect with as little javaScript as possible. Of course there's some javaScript needed to get the mouse position and apply it to the custom cursor. But with CSS custom properties it's possible to pass the mouse coordinates as variables and let CSS do the rest. So what about mouse interactions such as hover or active? Well, with the `:has` pseudo-class it's possible to check if the cursor is hovering over any element in the document and apply different styles to the custom cursor.

The `:has` pseudo-class is mostly referred to as the "parent selector" because it allows you to select a parent element based on its children. In most cases it's used to select a parent based on its direct children or descendants. But the implications of this selector are much greater. By chaining selectors together it's possible to select elements based on other elements that are nowhere near each other. The trick is to go completely up the document tree and down again. That's why it is sometimes referred to as the "god selector".

The basic setup is to add an empty `<div class="cursor"></div>` element at the end of the body. This makes sure the cursor is always on top of other elements by default. You could do this step with javascript but why not just add it to the HTML directly?

The javascript is pretty simple. All that's needed is the mouse position while moving and pass the coordinates as CSS custom properties. If you want a smoother effect you need to add a delay and use `requestAnimationFrame`. I'm adding px to the end of the values to make sure they can be used as CSS values. But you could even do that in CSS. This is the basic version:

```javascript
document.addEventListener("mousemove", (e) => {
  document.documentElement.style.setProperty("--mx", e.clientX + "px");
  document.documentElement.style.setProperty("--my", e.clientY + "px");
});
```

So now the 2 custom properties `--mx` and `--my` are added to the document root. Since the custom properties update when the mouse moves, the cursor will follow the mouse when we apply them as variables for the value of the `translate` property of the cursor.

```css
.cursor {
  --cursor-size: 20px;
  width: var(--cursor-size);
  aspect-ratio: 1;
  border-radius: 50%;
  background-color: indigo;
  position: fixed;
  top: 0;
  left: 0;
  /* use translate to substract the size directly */
  translate: calc(var(--mx) - var(--cursor-size) / 2) calc(
      var(--my) - var(--cursor-size) / 2
    );
  transition: 0.25s ease;
  transition-property: scale, opacity;
  pointer-events: none;
}
```

I'm also using custom properties to set the width and height of the cursor. This makes it easy to change the size of the cursor in one place. And I can use the same property to position the cursor in the middle of the cursor by using `calc` to subtract half the width and height from the mouse position.

And now it's time to use the `:has` pseudo-class to check if the document has any hovered or active links or buttons. If it does, we can change the size and opacity of the cursor to create a hover effect.

```css
body:has(:is(a:hover, button:hover)) .cursor {
  scale: 2;
  opacity: 0.75;
}

body:has(:is(a:active, button:active)) .cursor {
  scale: 1.5;
  opacity: 0.75;
}
```

import CursorBasic from "../../components/Demos/Cursor/CursorBasic.astro";

<CursorBasic />

That's all there is to it. You can of course add more interactions and styles to the cursor. For example changing the color based on the hovered element or adding different effects for different types of elements. The possibilities are endless.

import CursorAdvanced from "../../components/Demos/Cursor/CursorAdvanced.astro";

<CursorAdvanced />

In this case I updated the cursor's internal HTML with multiple possible states. Based on the hovered element different parts of the cursor are shown or hidden. This way I can show text inside the cursor or show an icon based on the hovered element.

```css
body:has(.cursor-read:hover) .cursor__pointer--read {
  opacity: 1;
}
```

Have a look at [this codepen](https://codepen.io/simoncoudeville/pen/yyeMwbb) to see the full code and play around with it.

import Cursor from "../../components/Demos/Cursor/cursor.astro";

<Cursor />
